{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl ;\red31\green73\blue125;\red0\green0\blue0;}{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\b\f0\fs36 Settlement and Land Acts in Quebec\par\fs26 A Civil Law Perspective for the Settlor\par\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b0\f1\fs24\par The Settlement and Land Acts in Quebec (often referred to historically as \ldblquote settlement acts\rdblquote in common-law contexts) don\rquote t operate the same way as in other Canadian provinces. Quebec follows the \b Civil Code of Qu\'e9bec (CCQ)\b0 rather than English common law. What people usually mean by \ldblquote settlement\rdblquote in Quebec law relates to property transfers, trusts, usufructs, substitutions (a civil law concept similar to a reversionary interest), or estate planning arrangements rather than a distinct \ldblquote settled land act\rdblquote statute like in older British law.\par\cf1\b\f0\fs26 The Role of the Settlor (Constituent) in Quebec Civil Law\par\cf2\b0\f1\fs24 In Quebec civil law, the closest equivalent to a \ldblquote settlor\rdblquote is the \b constituent of a trust (constituant)\b0. Under the Civil Code, a trust creates a \b separate patrimony by appropriation\b0 \emdash meaning the property is no longer owned by the settlor personally, but is administered by trustees for beneficiaries. The settlor generally cannot simply \ldblquote take back\rdblquote the property unless the trust deed specifically reserves that right. The concept of \ldblquote reversion\rdblquote exists in civil law more in the form of a \b substitution\b0 (where property passes from one beneficiary to another upon a condition or term) or through conditions written into the act of donation.\par\cf1\b\f0\fs26 Termination of a Trust\par\cf2\b0\f1\fs24 Termination depends entirely on the type of legal arrangement. A trust can end when:\par\pard\li720\sa100\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\'b7\tab Its \b term expires\b0;\par\'b7\tab Its \b purpose is fulfilled\b0 or becomes impossible;\par\'b7\tab \b All beneficiaries consent\b0 (in certain conditions); or\par\'b7\tab A \b court orders termination\b0.\par\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f1\fs24 If the trust instrument includes a clause allowing \b revocation by the settlor\b0, then termination may occur without court involvement, provided all legal formalities are respected (often requiring notarized documentation).\par\cf1\b\f0\fs26 Is a Judge Required?\par\cf2\b0\f1\fs24 Whether a judge is required depends on the situation. If the act clearly allows revocation and all parties agree, it may be handled through a \b notary\b0 without going before a judge. However, if there is disagreement between beneficiaries, ambiguity in the deed, incapacity of a party, or if the arrangement involves substitution or \b protected beneficiaries\b0 (like minors), court authorization may be necessary. In Quebec, changes to patrimonial rights that affect third parties or protected persons often require judicial oversight.\par\cf1\b\f0\fs26 Important Notice\par\cf2\b0\f1\fs24 If you\rquote re dealing with a specific instrument (for example, a notarial trust, donation with conditions, or substitution clause), the \b exact wording controls\b0. In Quebec civil law, the document itself is central. Before attempting termination, it\rquote s essential to \b review the original deed carefully\b0 \emdash preferably with a notary or lawyer \emdash because acting outside the terms of the Civil Code could make the termination \b invalid\b0.\par\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\f0\fs18\par\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par This document is for informational purposes only and does not constitute legal advice.\par Please consult a qualified notary or lawyer in Quebec for guidance specific to your situation.\par}